Okay, reading from my actual log book here. On the
20th of December, that's up at Kunming, I would add
it to you,
shot down eight out of ten Jap bombers.
And that was a one hour and 30 minute flight, by the
way, including the scramble time and all. And
that's the one where the intelligence said the
other two never did get across the border. And to
your credit, there were two kills? Yes. They paid
me for two on that flight, yeah. Now, the 26th of
January,
I sure as shot down three Jap I-97 fighters in a
45-minute flight. Then it wasn't the 29th of
January like we've been saying. It was the 26th of
January. 26. You shot down three over Rangoon.
Yeah. Okay, we'll get that right on the tape.
25th of February shot down one Jap I-97. Okay well
let's talk about that one then. That's your that's
your next combat success. 25th of February 1942,
where were you? Oh
wait a minute. 26th January 1942, shot down three
Jap I-97 fighters. Now that's the one we were
talking about. Yeah we just I've got down three,
and in my diary I said two. Yeah. You better fix that
in your diary. I think I said two in one probable.
Isn't that what I said? In the diary, you said two in
one probable. In your logbook, you say three.
Yeah. In this logbook, right. You see, that's the
reason I had to edit this.
Now we're talking about the next combat victory
mission that you had, the 25th of February, 1942.
And where were you at this time? At Rangoon. And
you'd been flying missions throughout the time
from the 26th of January to the 25th of February,
but this is the next kill that you had. Yeah, yeah.
Would you describe
that? About this time, I caught sight of a Jap
formation. Neil came on the radio, come on over
here, here they are. I thought to myself, where in
the hell is here? And started in on the bombers I
saw. There were 14 in perfect V formation.
Suddenly I caught sight of that usual cluster
formation of Japanese fighters directly above
the bombers and changed my mind. I had to get some
altitude speed. I ended up making my first attempt
on the fighters, and this one was head on. He caught
fire before I closed in to the point where I had to
pull up to miss him. I looked for another and
reached up with a pad on the charging handle of a .50
caliber gun." I had a tendency to do that every time
I would knock a fighter down. Pat the gun. And so you
were coming straight in on this one, and he was
coming straight in at you. A lot of times this
happened. And you hit him? Yeah. He didn't hit you?
No. Again, I ended up in a head-on attack. They were
equally as aggressive as we were. We headed
straight at each other, each with all our guns
blazing. At what... It seemed to be the last second
he pulled up, and I had decided to do the same thing
at the same time. This is the one I was telling you
about a while ago. Oh, okay. It is more natural,
G-force-wise, to pull up than to push over. I
reacted, it seemed, unconsciously, as I shoved
forward on a stick violently. As tight as my
seatbelt was, and boy, did we put him tight in
expectation of combat. My head hit the top of my
canopy. We shot past each other, him above me. I
rolled and pulled violently to the left,
straining my head over backwards to pick him up.
He, too, was inflamed. Yow! Two in less than three
minutes. Now, this is, see how I'm getting them
mixed up? This is the next day. Yeah. Now, this is
the 25th of February I'm reading from. Well, your
logbook says the 26th of February. The 25th of
February. That's for one. Oh, yeah. The 26th. Two,
yeah. Two. You've got some work to do on that. Well,
this is the first time I've put it together.
I typed this for the first time out of my original
diary.
Well, that describes some of the combat anyhow,
whether my days are right or not. So the 25th of
February, you shot down one. The 26th of February,
you shot down two more. Yeah.
Which brings us up to a total of eight. Right, and
there it is, Detroit 8 airplane. On March 1942,
before the strafing attack on Chiang Mai. Now this
is after we had evacuated from Rangoon. So you
left, when did you leave Rangoon? Right after the
26th of February? Did I say 27th? 27th. At 27th. You
left Rangoon. On the 27th, and landed and operated
out of Magwe, M-A-G-W-E, Burma, on the 28th of
February. Okay,
so you went up to Burma, and how are the conditions
there? This is where you begin to see the usual
pandemonium and mix-up of war front,
particularly when you're losing and retreating.
The Japanese were pushing up from Singapore, up
the peninsula, come across into Rangoon, Burma,
and taking over that base, and they were pushing up
north towards China. And see, we were evacuating
north up to Irrawaddy River.
That's Mogwe right there. Here is Rangoon, Mogwe.
No, wait a minute. No, it's up here. Right up here.
OK. This is Mogli right here. That's Tangu.
OK. But it's right in this area. Yeah. OK. How did
you get them? Could you describe the conditions of
Mogli? The remnants of the RAF air base. and
strictly RAF, the remnants of what had escaped
from Singapore. And they had a shambles of a light
bomber Blenheim outfit remaining, five or six
airplanes. They had a couple of old Lysander
observation airplanes, which were practically
useless for observation and photo
reconnaissance, if you will. And they had about
four or five hurricanes. And they were hoping for
reinforcements immediately from India, you
know, to come across. And, of course, they were
delighted for us to stay with them because we were,
you know, still fighting for them. You began to see
refugees, you know, and that's the thing that you
remember so well. that shows the effects of war on a
countryside. Peasants with what belongings they
have left and carts drawn by oxen or Indian water
buffalo. Some wealthy people apparently and a
nice little foreign car, Japanese automobile.
And the city just overflown. We had, the only place
we had at Montgomery was tents. The British put up
some tents for us, because they didn't have
anything else. And if I remember correctly, we
had, I think we had about six airplanes. We had to
leave one airplane at random, we couldn't get out.
And because we had robbed it before to get the
others out. I think we had about six airplanes. Of
course, six pilots were flying, including me and
Bob Neal. Incidentally, two of the boys got lost on
the way up because of sandstorms. Again, no
navigation aid. But fortunately, they found open
field where they could land, and we got those
airplanes back. So you only left with six, and you
went down there with, what, 12? Well, you know, we
had airplanes going back and replaced with parts.
We lost training-wise. several airplanes in
Rangoon. But actual combat, in actual combat, if I
can remember correctly, I think we lost, in actual
combat, eight pilots. At Rangoon or the whole
time? No, throughout the entire AVG history. Wow.
And now, we lost more airplanes than that because,
see, the pilots bailed out. I bailed out of an
airplane once, see, and I'm still there. So we lost
more airplanes than that. We eventually got our
100 airplane, just about the time I left 42, and I
helped ferry some of them, the P-40E. But let's get
back to the conditions now. The people were
crowding into the cities, and how about you slept
in tents, and that was it. How about the bugs? I
never remember any bad bugs until China. About a
quarter of them were in China. We really got in a
mess of those. Mosquitoes? I don't remember
mosquitoes bothering us. I remember at Mogwe, the
tents weren't too bad. It was cool. Hot in the day,
so you want to be cool at night. I don't ever
remember mosquitoes bothering us anyplace. Were
you on the floor or on the couch? No, we were in the
couch. And we had mosquito nets, too. In fact, one
of the main things in Burma was mosquito nets.
Never anything bothered me except some ants got on
me one time. I think it was because I had some sweets
nutting hair oil on my hair. I woke up with them all
over my head.
Bed bugs, definitely in Ling Ling, China. A gift
store came home in August. I was practically eaten
alive with those. Plus bed, I was fed some tongue
oil, you know, tongue nut. You make paint oil out of
it, mixed with paint. I'm getting ahead of myself,
but the Chinese went down and bought that instead
of cooking oil to cook their fish in. And the whole
outfit got sick, including Johnny Allison, who
we're just going to continue doing. At Ma Gui, we
ate at the British Mess, and this was getting
pretty sparse then. I remember having beer and
toast for breakfast several times. That's all.
Beer and toast? Hot beer and toast. Why hot beer?
Well, that was all I had. Didn't have any ice. I
don't remember any decent coffee at all in Burma.
In China, we got some better coffee, but I didn't
get good coffee until I came back to India. Who was
supplying you? RAF at that time. The RAF was
supplying you. Was Chenault with you? No,
Chenault was still up in China. We were
communicating with him through British
communications, RAF. They kept a link with him,
actually. And radio teletype. How many squadrons
did he have? He still had three. We always had
three. I know you always had three, but how many
were with him in China? Two. Two, and you were down
there on your own. He had the what? We weren't
engaged in any fighting in China at the time
because of the Burma campaign. And he was using the
reserve forces up at Kunming to rotate and see the
squadron. We were the last squadron to go down to
Kunming. And I think it, I mean, Rangoon. And I
think even while we were there, he even rotated a
few aircraft, took some of our bummers and sent
some better ones. maintained one to us without
rotating another squadron down he kept us there
towards the end it mocked we finally he pulled all
of us out and replaced us with about six more
college and matter of fact he brought a whole
squadron down at that time this will be
interesting to you uh general
the old ground pounder And General Fennel got in a
horrible argument that went clear to the top
between President Roosevelt and General
Esselstyn about ground support for General
Stillwell's troops.
I had met General Stillwell once or twice. I
actually sat under a wing of an airplane and talked
with him. He was quite a dedicated old man. ground
pounder type, if you will. Real dedicated old
gentleman. He looked more like a, you pardon it, a
college professor in English rather than a
military. I'm glad I wasn't interested. No, I
mean, he looked to be, John Stilwell, he looked to
be then about 65. No kidding, yeah. He was lean and
wore some old steel rim spectacles and had a burr
cut haircut. skinny old skinny as a rail and wore
typical ground pounder old uniform rag taggle
type but more dedicated to his task and he was be
damned that Burma if the Japs were going to run him
out of Burma he would be damned if they did and he was
trying to get all of our measly three squadrons if
you will Chinese Air Force dedicated to nothing
more of a ground support of him if his troops in the
jungle. And of course, we weren't about to do that.
Why not? Well, General Chenault knew better, and
when it began to trickle down to the pilots that
General Chenault might be losing this battle and
we'd have to do it, this is one time that morale of
the flying target began to get pretty low. You
couldn't, you just can't visualize until you see
it. Trying to support Well, it's sort of like the
Vietnamese War, trying to support some, if you
will, jungle fighters in the jungles that are so
thick with trees that range anywhere from 100 feet
to 200 feet high. No way to see them. Plus the fact
that operate that low with a P-40 and no way to dive
away should the Zeros come in and get on top of you,
you're a dead duck. And we knew it. And boy, we
just... One squadron was ready to... Throwing a
towel had the Generalissimo, I had General
Chennault do it. Had Stillwell. Had his way. So
Chennault and Stillwell were arguing about this.
Oh, violent enemies. They were worse than General
Chennault and General Hepburn. But through
the Gissimo, Generalissimo, General Chennault
won his argument and said, no, first priority is
still the air defense. And so none of us had to do.
There were two or three missions flown on this, and
boy, the pilots, they didn't like it at all. I never
went on a mission like that, but I wouldn't have
liked it either. How could you help them? I mean,
how could you give them any support if you couldn't
find them? That's it. It was worthless. It was
absolutely worthless. Useless. And it was almost
a suicide flight should a Japanese come over the
interception. And what did you think of Stilwell?
Well, that's the reason I didn't like him. Because
he was being unreasonable. He was one of the older
types, and I really don't think he understood air
power. Plus the fact that at
that time, just at the starting of the war, air
power hadn't really made itself known. And
I don't think he understood it at all.
We would have done it had we been ordered to do it,
but General Chenault, I'm sure, would have been
the last man to agree with it. Now, when you were,
you said before that you were sitting underneath
an airplane with Stilwell. Tell me about that. I
just had, he was waiting for a pilot in nearby
Gutenberg to take him. It was one of these things,
he'd been down to talk to Schmeltz, he'd been back
at Chung King, and during his time he was talking
about this fight that was going on. At that
particular time I was sitting with him, I didn't
know all this background. This was the early days
of it. Like I told you, I gave my impression of him as
an elderly old boy. He talked to me. Never asked me
many questions about my combat experience or how
you're doing or anything. I guess he was
preoccupied with thought. I didn't, at that time,
I'm not sure I realized really how big a man he was.
But later on, later on, you know, knowing what I,
learning what I did, that's
the reason I have no respect for him. As a military,
as an army commander, I'm sure that the old boy was
dedicated, and he had his objective and had his
job, but he was completely, to do what he wanted to
do was completely unreasonable. No way. And it was
not enough. Finally what happened was the Chinese
stopped the Japanese at the northern reaches of
Burma
the Mekong River. The
Chinese
actually stopped them. They never did actually
penetrate the southern border of China. Then the
Japanese decided to come from the north down too.
So Stilwell never did reject or eject the Japanese
out of northern Burma. Eventually, they just
withdrew because of higher priorities in other
areas when they began to lose the war. But at any
rate, Stilwell lost his battle with the old man,
and we continue to do everything. OK. Now, how long
were you at? Now, I
and my bunch, the first squadron, we were replaced
by one of the other squadrons, partially, and
there were only six airplanes. We went on back up to
Kunming. This was in early February, I believe.
No, early March.
The short after we left Magui, by the way, the base
was real hard hit by the Japanese, and we lost, one
pilot was killed on the ground, one of our pilots
was killed on the ground from bombing, and we lost
about two or three aircraft. And the British
evacuated down, of course, so did we. Then we
backed up clear into lower wing across, right
across the river into southern China. And in
effect, turn Burma over to the Japanese. Then we
operated out of lower wing on the same type of
mission. Were you disappointed about losing
Burma?
Looking back now, yeah, we were disappointed. It
looked as though the Japanese were winning the
war.
We were being squeezed back up into China. As a
matter of fact, at times we'd sit in bull sessions
and figure at the end of our year's contract, say
September, how in the world would we get out of
China? The Japanese had the coast block, now they
had the south block of Burma, and we dreamed up ways
to go through the Himalayas some way back down
through Afghanistan into India. course never
turned out to be that way. Then of course they
developed the, that's one reason they developed
the hump route with air and even tried to build a
Lido road across it to get supplies into China. And
that's what generated the Chiang Mai raid. Chiang
Mai, Thailand. Okay, that was, okay, that was your
next major raid. For our squadron. I mean for you.
Oh, for me, right. I'm not talking about—I'm
talking about you. See, we drew the two squadrons
back up into Kunming, and then eventually had to
operate with one of them in Lower Wing, one in Lower
Wing and two in Kunming. And then, you know, to get
back into war, the old man dreamed up this mission.
And when was this? Well, now that's—maybe it's
helpful in this time. Yeah, I'm reflecting. Yes,
Strait of Jaffa Aerodrome at Chiang Mai, 25th of
March.
25th of March.
And where is that? Can you come in? Yeah, yeah. You
know, strange as it is, I mean, it's
coincidentally,
subsequently we get to it. See, I was in the
Southeast Asian War, like you were, and I was
assigned Thailand. I was Deputy Commander of
1312th Air Force. It, uh... Udorn, and I visited
the detachment up at Chiang Mai, Thailand, the
very air base that I hit, if I'm not kidding. That
must have been fascinating.
So it's north of Bangkok. Chiang Mai is the Summer
capital, here we are, Chiang Mai. It's Chiang Mai.
So it's close to the Burma border. Yeah, it's right
across the Burma border.
It's the Saline River. Northwest Thailand.
Northwest Thailand, yeah. C-H-A-N-G-M-A-I.
C-H-I-A-N-G. Oh, okay. Capital M-A-I. Chiang
Mai, Thailand. We'll get that right.
And that was on 25th of March. Tell me about that
raid. Why did he want to dream this up? Wasn't air
defense enough? Wasn't that enough of a chore? We
couldn't get to the Japanese Air Force. They
wouldn't come to Kunming anymore. They knew
they'd lose everything they had. Lower Wing, they
were taking Burma, so why come up at Lower Wing and
suffer air defense missions and lose airplanes
like they've been losing at Rangoon? So... We
weren't engaging them. The old man began to get
impatient, so we began to figure out how to... So
for a month, you didn't have any contact with them?
Well, at Lower Wing, yeah, they'd have, every once
in a while, they'd mix up down there, and they
knocked a few airplanes down in northern Burma,
trying to attack them. But we up at Kunming didn't
do a thing. We had to get a scare sometime and
scramble. Well, we don't scramble, sure, but
never did meet them. Well, the old man thought this
mission at Chiang Mai, Thailand, he threw the
intelligence, was the headquarters of the entire
Southeastern Japanese Air Force, all Southeast
Asia. And he knew that they were planning a hell of a
big push to support the army in penetrating
southern China. And they were massing their
aircraft, primarily at Chiang Mai, Thailand.
They get this through intelligence sources. So he
called Bob Neal in and Jack Newkirk. I don't know if
you ever heard of Jack Newkirk, but he was the
commander of the second squadron at that time. Bob
Neal was the commander of the first squadron. And
sat down and discussed this plan he had that we were
to take off with 14
airplanes. Jack Newkirk would have four and,
well, we were going to take 14 airplanes. He hadn't
decided who would take them yet. And he was going to
hit Chiang Mai, Thailand with a surprise dawn
attack. Now mind you, some of these pilots that
were flying these airplanes, P-40s, had never
taken one off at night. We had one pilot in our
squadron that was from the Navy And if I remember
correctly, I don't think he ever flew a combat
airplane at night, just a training airplane. But
anyway. But did you have any fire planes? Wouldn't
you need some bombers for this mission? Sure, but
this was straight. We didn't have any bombers.
This is the old man. The only way you could do it, we
had to trace them. Did the P-40 take any bombs?
Later on, we actually had desperation. We, as a
matter of fact, killed two of our best pilots
already. That's another story. Bob Little.
Tremendous. Ace. Okay, so... See, that's all us
supporting Stillwell again. You had no bombs on
this mission? No. It's strictly strafing. Okay.
And the way we planned this flight, we were to go
over to Lower Wing, refuel, and looking at the map,
you find low wing is just across the border from
northern Burma, much closer to Chiang Mai. So
you're going to refuel there the day before, sleep
overnight, get up in the morning, and go at dawn.
Refuel and get everything ready. Then late that
evening, just before dusk, we would take off and
fly to another little RAF base in northern,
northeastern Burma, back up in a pocket to the
eastern part of Burma and the north where the
Japanese hadn't got to. There's no reason for them
to even be in the area because there's no valuable
economic... The railroad went due north through
Lascio and Mo Wing along the Burma Road. But
there's a little RAF base that's still held there
in support for maybe reconnaissance or
observation planes. It was right across the
border from Thailand, very close to Chiang Mai.
Well, we were going to slip in there just before...
night so that, you know, Japanese, nobody would
suspect us. Or if somebody did, they'd have less
time to alert the Japanese for the planned dawn
attack. Now, that's what we did, and it ended up
where Bob Neal was picked by the old man, General
Chenault, to command the mission, much to old Jack
Newkirk's He was a very spirited type, fine guy,
ex-Navy pilot. He had the second squadron. And I'm
saying this for a particular reason. He was killed
in the mission, but he became very downcast. He
went along with it after the old man made the
decision, but he would be the second in command.
And furthermore, he would only take four
airplanes out of his squadron. Bob Neal would take
ten. I'm sorry, it would take six. There's going to
be a total of ten aircraft. Bob Neal would take four
for the attack and two for high cover. So a total of
ten airplanes. And we had it all laid out where we'd
go into this little, leave Namsang was the name of
it. Let me get the
name. Save your time, take it off me. It was a little
forward RAF base in Namsang. We'd sleep in there at
night. How do you spell that? N-A-M-S-A-N-G. If
it's small, you can't find it. Really, all it is is a
RAF little support base. So you'd sleep in there.
Grass strip, about 2,000 feet long, with an
operations building and one barracks.
Did you do it? We are all recovered in there that
night, 10 aircraft, 10 pilots, and no maintenance
people. The RAF agreed to have some refueling
crews there to help refuel the airplane the
following day after recovery. So when the pilots
got there, we parked our own airplanes, tied them
down, and did everything necessary. The pilots
did this. And by the time we got in there, it's just
as dark. Then we went over to the, all ten of us, went
over to the RAF barracks and the RAF gave us dinner
and we turned in early. And I remember old Jack
Newkirk, he, oh he was down, he wouldn't even
matter of fact, he would hardly speak to anybody
during dinner, but all of us were excited, you
know, talking about it, and he was very
down-to-date. The next, uh... Because he was
second in command? Yeah, he was second, and then,
uh... And he wanted to be first? Oh, yeah. Oh, I
nearly killed him. He returned, uh, that's ironic
when I say I nearly killed him. He was killed in the
mission. Uh, he went to bed early. Well, uh, we went
to bed, and the next morning, we got up real, way
before daylight, and we ate, we got out, ready to
take off. And we got there. OK. So
they woke you at 4 o'clock in the morning? Yeah. And
it was 525 before we were in a cockpit warming up the
planes.
I'm going to have to correct this reading from my
diary. There were eight of us. The two top cover
guys were back at lower wing, and they were to come
over and join us, rendezvous with us. Okay. So
there were eight of you. Yeah. Some had never taken
a plane off at night. Remember, this was before
daylight. Even I had not taken the P-40 off at
night. Yet these thoughts apparently never
entered the minds of these guys. Checking my diary
notes, I think back on these moments. It was pitch
dark deep in the jungle of Burma on a desolate RAF
air strip with no lights whatsoever for
reference. We parked a truck at the far end of the
grass strip and turned the headlights on. This was
strictly an aiming point for the takeoff. Bob Neal
earlier took off and I pointed at him. It was 6.10
a.m. when I pushed the throttle full open A blue
exhaust flame swept around the lower side of my
windshield and trailed along the two slides to the
rear of my vision. I aimed at the truck lights and
felt my way along the grass strip until the wheels
felt light. Weaved at a back pressure on a stick and
I was free of the ground. I couldn't see a damn
thing. I went on instruments. Now this is, you
know, some of these young fellows hadn't even
flown at night. Flying instruments, too, in a
fighter airplane. It's rough. My basic reference
was my rate of climb indicator. As long as it showed
up, I felt reasonably assured. A few seconds
later, I relaxed to look up and see Bob's
navigation lights on his plane. There he was,
slightly to the left and high. Were you afraid? No.
Taken off? Tense. Oh, no. Just tense. Knew he'd do
it. I followed and thought to myself, how in the
hell will those other guys make it over? How did
they? They did. They got over. So all eight of you
were following each other's wing lights. Well,
after you get in the air, see, it's no flat
airplane. Then as you get further up in the air, you
know, just as breaking dawn, daylight, you know,
it gets lighter. We were at a rendezvous over the
field at 10,000 feet. I'm glad I'm reading this out
of the diary because this is correct. A plan called
for me to fly Bob's right wing in number two
position, for I had flown over the area before and
recognized Chiang Mai Air Base. To go back here a
minute, on Pearl Harbor Day, we were at Tangu, the
whole ABG was, and we were shocked that the old man
immediately ordered a flight of two of us to fly
across to Chiang Mai Air Base, which was where the
Japanese had taken over. that area to see if there
was any airplanes on it. So I, and of course Bob Neal
and I went, and we checked the base, and I knew the
area. There's a big mountain right by the air base,
by the way. So I knew exactly where the air base was,
and that's the reason I was selected to fly next to
Bob Neal's wing. Bob had never seen a plane before.
Pappy Boyington and Bartling were number three
and four, and then came Eddie Rector and Black Mac
McGarry as a top cover element of the two ships. So
that gave us six. Jack Newkirk was leading another
flight with Ed Gesselbrecht on his wing, followed
by a second element of Laura and Buzz Keaton.
Well, we rendezvoused. It'd be too much to read all
this. We rendezvoused at 10,000 feet, and... By
that time, it was a great enough day where, at that
altitude, it was light enough to see each other. We
didn't need lights. I turned off the flashlight I
had between my legs and put it down in the glove
compartment on the side. Then we started off on
strictly time and distance and compass course for
the air base, Chiang Mai, Thailand. And I think it
was going to be about a, 30-minute flight,
something like that. It wasn't very far. And Bob
Neal was leading. Now, Bob and I had agreed the
night before. See, I was flying on his wing. He and I
agreed that if he overshot or didn't detect this
mountain and wasn't sure of where he was, I would
fly up, and I did, and I felt he was going off course
and was going to miss it. I would fly up next to him,
wiggle the wings, and do like this, and I would take
over. No radio transmissions. No, this is total
radio silence. Oh, yeah. And sure enough, as we got
up towards the mountain, and I knew exactly where
we were, and we got to the side of the mountain just
off our left wing, when Bob should have started
turning, he just kept going on. And I knew then that
he wasn't sure. So I moved up, put my wing on my head,
and he, okay. So then he dropped back and took on my
wings. So you took command then of the attack? I
took command. The four of us would make the attack
and the other two were to give us high cover in case
some Japanese airplanes got off. See, then they
would give us cover because we were going to be low.
We were going to be straking.
I thought you said there was eight of you. Well,
I'll tell you about the other two. Two to
rendezvous. Yeah. Okay, so you four were ready to
go down? Newkirk Flight was supposed to
rendezvous with us. He never rendezvoused with
us. We didn't know what happened until we came
back. I'll tell you that story. So the six of us went
on down. And to get back, I started down in my turn
from 10,000 feet and drove the jungle to Burma,
Thailand, Southeast Asia. It's steamy and a lot of
mist and smoke in the morning, just the daylight.
But I knew that air base had to be right by that
mountain, a big square. Did you see the mountain?
Yeah, I saw the mountain. You could see the
mountain, but it was all a bunch of haze. Oh, yeah.
So that's all you could see. Yeah, yeah. But I knew
there, it wasn't fog, but it was haze. Mountains
stuck up way above me. And I knew where I was. And as I
started down, I began, in a gentle dive, began to
pick out this square, which was the air base. and
sure enough I knew where it was and so I knew that was
it and to signal the rest of the flight I turned on my
gun switches and all and gave a burst of my guns to be
sure and check them out. So of course that alerted
the rest of the other three guys that this was the
attack. Did that alert the Japanese? Well no, we
were matter of fact in Less than 20 seconds I was
across the field on the first attack. We were down
about 4,000 or 5,000 feet from the end of the field.
OK. So you were moving in? Oh, the airplane was, I
mean, the base was completely covered with
airplanes. One end or the other. They were so close
to one another, the wings were practically
touching them. Really? What a target. And we came
down. We must have been making about 350 or 400 as we
came across the base. Miles an hour. You were early
hauling. Oh, yeah. And as I came across the base, I
came down the line and opened up on a big transport
aircraft, right in line with all the fighters. And
I was very lucky on that thing. Immediately, it
caught fire. One of the engines burst into the
plane. Must have been a gas tank. And I went right on
over to the stand. Oh, just barely missed the top of
the airplane and the buildings and everything
around. Just firing everything out. Yeah. And I
probably hit the airplane next to it. But there's
so many of them. And of course, the other guys came
right behind me. And that was the start of the
attack. We caught them completely flat-footed. I
came around, all of us standing low, not a sign of AA
fire or anything against us. And by the time of that
low, see, the mist was no problem because we were
right on the field and visibility was good. Even
2,000 or 3,000 feet, plenty good. So we banked
around sharply. I came back this time to head right
down the line of these fighter airplanes. And as I
came across a, what's the word we use?
Been so long. But anyway, I climbed just a second to
get a better view of my target, and then dove down
immediately on this line of fighters. I never got
over 500, 300 feet above the ground, even on my
climb. So when you were shooting, you were about
300 feet above the ground? Oh, practically on the
treetops. How high were you when you were
strafing, when you were shooting? Well, to shoot,
see, you had to point your gun at the airplane. So
naturally I picked up the first airplane on the end
and started firing at him, his fighters, little
I-97 fighters, and immediately he caught on fire.
And then until he got lower, you had to pull off of
him. And then I raked my fire through the rest of
them just to clear him. And as I was I couldn't have
missed the airplane over 10 or 15 feet. You know,
then it even seemed like five feet. But the pilots
were getting out of the cockpits. The colors were
turning around, and the pilots were getting out of
the cockpits to go take cover. They just didn't
have time to get off. They'd come completely
flat-footed. And they'd given up trying to get
off, see. And now that was second pass. And the
other three were right behind you. And by the... In
fighter parlance, to make an attack, a strafing
attack, even come back across your target twice,
even come back across it once, it's almost
suicide. In Europe, this would have been suicide.
Why? Because of the AAA, and small weapons fire.
But over there, we would call them some
red-handed, you know, and just flat-footed. Even
on the second pass, I didn't get any return fire
from the ground. So I came around to make the third
pass. I almost ran into one of my boys. I don't even
know which one it was. I think it was Barton. He was
coming across 90 degrees from me, but we missed
each other. Fortunately, it was skipped by luck,
coordinated, where we were hitting his field in
the wrong direction. And by the third time, I came
across the third time, down the same line of
fighters, because that's where most of the
fighters were. And the field began to come up in
smoke and flames all over. And this time, I noticed
when I went across, I got some tracers firing past
me. So I knew somebody was shooting at me. So I
pulled off and turned to the right this time. And
what did you aim for that time? Fighters. Still
fighters. Oh, goodness. There had to be 30
fighters in that one line. What kind were they? The
line I said. And I don't remember seeing any zeroes
on the field. And then this time it banked to the
right and came around. And I was going to come down
that line again where the big transport was with
some of the bigger aircraft. And there had been
some bombers, but I don't remember. And the smoke
was practically covering the entire field by
then. But I decided to go ahead and make a fourth
pass. One, two, three, yeah. On the fourth pass.
Now, was everybody still in line behind you? Oh,
no, they began to go across, you know, flying all
directions. As a matter of fact... Wasn't that
kind of dangerous? Yeah, you bet it was. Why did
people stay behind each other, basically? Well,
on the first pass, we did that. But then each person
started picking out his own targets. That's what
happened. And I agree, it was uncoordinated.
Well, in a lot of ways, it was an advantage because
we got the entire field covered. But I made four
passes... myself, which was just unheard of. But
on the fourth pass, by the way, I began to see puffs
of smoke. OK, so tell me about the fourth pass.
Well, fourth pass, I think I came down the line
where the transport was again. I don't remember
which one was.
I believe this was my second or third pass. I
remained low and turned sharply to the left. I got a
glimpse of Bartning's plane zipping past just to
the rear of me. After some 270 degrees of turning, I
was in a position to strafe another line of parked
aircraft, practically wing-tripped between
two. Hell, I hadn't seen this many aircraft in
years. It seemed like the whole Japanese Air Force
had tried to crowd this one little field. I
couldn't miss. I squeezed the trigger again. Damn
it, my 50s wouldn't go. I charged them quickly.
They caught. I stayed my aim and straightened the
entire line of ships. It seemed as though my prop
tip would tip the heads of Jap pilots. That was my
second task. Other men were lying flat on the
ground nearby, evidently maintenance people.
Props were turning on the fighters, but not a
single aircraft was taxiing. As I completed my
second run, I got a glimpse of three aircraft, a
fire and a parked aircraft over which I had made my
first run. flipped sharply to the right to better
assess the damage I had done, and just at the right
time, too. I saw traceable it's all about me, and it
was obvious they were meant for me. The AAA defense
had come to life, but they were frantic and
disorganized. Had we been five minutes earlier,
it would have been too dark. The timing was
perfect. God and good luck was with us. Puffs of
black smoke appeared about a thousand feet above
the field, and defense was beginning to get in the
action. I wondered about Ed Rector and Black Mack,
who were assigned the job as top cover, and craned
my neck searching for enemy aircraft in the area.
None. I was now lined up for my third pass.